Before there was Fung Shui, there was Vastu.
Vastu is the 7 to10,000 year-old science
of building harmonious structures.
When this science is applied,
it allows the energy in the building
to flow freely, without obstructions.
Free-flowing energy supports a more abundant,
peaceful and harmonious life at home or in business.
One of the top Vastu experts in the country
is Michael Mastro.
His wife Robin has written an award-winning book
on how to create the powerful principles of Vastu
in small spaces she refers to as "alters."
Vastu is a 7 to 10,000-year-old practice
to the best of your knowledge,
and it is the grand-pappy to Fung Shui.
So let's begin with the science behind Vastu,
because often people think this is just a belief system,
but in fact, there's a science behind it.
Actually where it came from
or the scientific aspects of it?
The scientific aspects of it
and a little bit of background about where it came from.
OK.
So, the actual science came from the Vedas,
which are an ancient body of knowledge.
And one part of the Vedas is called Atharva Veda
and it deals with improving the quality of our life.
The Vedas were written by ancient seers, who--
In India.
In India, who observed the workings of nature
and its effect on the human organism.
And part of what they observed
was the environmental influences.
So, the Atharva Veda takes into account Arya Veda
which is the science of healing and medicine,
Dhanur Veda, which is the science of self-defence,
Jyotish, which is Indian astrology,
the influence of the planets and the stars on us,
and yoga, meditation and Vastu Shastra.
Vastu means building, shastra means science,
science of building.
So they studied the effects of
the natural forces of nature on the human organism
in different situations, in different dwellings, basically.
So they made a science of being able to
alter the energy within a space.
Yes.
And that is what you're doing in essence
in your practice and in your book.
Now, people seem to be more familiar
with the term Fung Shui, and maybe just very briefly,
you can tell us a little hop-scotch path
between Vastu and Fung Shui.
Sure.
Vastu is about 7 to 10,000-years-old
and about 3,000 years ago, it was carried by monks
over the mountains from India to China,
and from there it was adapted to local
culture and climatic conditions
and became known as Fung Shui.
The goal of Vastu and Fung Shui is the same,
to raise the level of life-force energy.
And in China they call it Chi
and in India they call it Prahna.
To create a situation where Chi or Prahna
can move freely in a space and uplift
the individual in that environment.
Somewhat like the human body,
as energy moves freely through the human body,
you have good health and a house
is an extension of our lives and has a life of it's own,
so it's about freeing energy then,
to move through our house in the same--
Absolutely.
And we were just speaking about these different disciplines,
Jyotish, Yoga, Meditation, Arya Veda,
all of these would deal with balancing the five elements
within the body, earth, water, fire, air, and space.
And this takes us, really,
into the alter, the creation of the alters then.
That's correct.
You're taking all of these elements
into consideration and placing them very specifically
and this leads to some exciting results.
And you came up with the alters,
really out of desperation, from what I'm understanding.
And if you could talk about that,
just a brief bit before we get into
another area I wanna ask you about,
which is some of the larger types of clients and bodies.
This isn't something that just people
in the metaphysical community use,
but in other countries, every bank, every business,
everything's based on these principles,
so let's start with you and how it started with you.
Well, about 20 years ago, I think my first
introduction to alters happened,
where I was coming out of a very difficult time in my life,
and had a awakened sense of creating a small environment
where I would put everything of value
into a certain pattern on the full moon
and allow the energy of the moon
to energize that to bring about change in my life.
And this really came about in a vision.
It was a very organic sort of vision
that sort of came through meditation.
I didn't realize that the pattern was
something that, many years later,
would actually be the pattern that I would use
in a graduate project to create small environments,
or alters, based on the sacred science of Vastu.
So, you've co-written this book
on creating sacred spaces within the home
or the workspace and these little alters.
First of all, how big are some of the clients
that you've had, how big are some of the institutions,
historically, that utilize this and to what end?
Before we go personal, let's talk about that.
The macro.
In the early 80s, I designed and built
the first Microsoft building,
according to the principles of Vastu.
And then in those few years, in the early 80s,
I also built several Boeing buildings,
utilizing these principles and we have presently
clients all over the world, doctors, dentists,
I've done several individual offices at Microsoft,
Rosetta, just several different types of businesses,
spas and--
So, Bill Gates actually understood enough
to have the vision to say, "We're not starting this business
"without the proper Vastu."
Is that how it happened?
Well, you can say that, in a round-about way.
He didn't even know that I utilized this knowledge,
but he picked us to build the building
and so in a round-about way, intuitively,
he probably did know that it would be good
to create a good start for his business.
Well, I'll say!
One of the other things, other organizations
that recently we've presented Vastu to,
is the World Bank in Washington, DC.
And Mike is scheduled to go next month
to speak at NASA, about Vastu.
So, there is interest in the corporate community
about what we do and I think that in any circumstance,
stress in the workplace is a huge issue.
Do you think that most
of the really large corporate entities
have had some exposure or understanding
of energetic forces behind what makes
a business truly lucrative and progressive?
I don't know if that's so much true
as there are always individuals in corporations
and those are the individuals, they're like seeds, you know?
They're planted there and somehow
know or hear about us and find it intriguing,
and want us to come.
So, in a way we're bringing light into those corporations
at maybe at a higher level of consciousness,
you know, the executive level may not
be aware of what we do, but that doesn't
discount the possibility that they also
are open to the ideas of creating more
a supportive work environment for their employees.
Because that only aids them on the other end.
Recently, there was a study that, uh,
what did they say?
Like the amount of people who had sick days
has escalated to a rampant level,
that productivity has fallen,
they said the cost of insurance has escalated
and so much of our illness is based on stress.
So, these are things that human resource divisions
in all corporations are beginning to look at
and take very serious, they take serious, seriously
how the environment is affecting them,
affecting their work force,
because it affects them on a money level.
Mm, so it's starting to make sense.
Looking to the old traditions, they're starting to
make sense on many levels, not the least
of which is money.
So let's continue on.
So, you were having a hard time in life
and you had this vision that you needed to
put things in, you said, a bowl with a reflective surface
on the new moon, or the full moon.
Right, the full moon.
And what happened?
How did that lead to this?
Well, it didn't really lead to everything,
but what it did give me was a definite
understanding of my connection to the divine
and that I wasn't alone.
And I think, for me at the time, as a young mother,
with a very young infant, who had just come
out of a very rough period, the feeling
that I had some power in my life
was very important to me.
And it supported my abundance for the,
for the next twenty years.
So you're saying after
you did this first meditation--
The first meditation--
How did things change
after you did your first?
The first full moon after the meditation,
I put together an alter out on our porch
and using what I remembered from the vision that I had
placed the elements in a very specific pattern
and had this offering bowl in the center
that was what I saw in my vision
to be a hammered chalice of metal,
but I had nothing similar to that,
so I used a, my salad bowl, wrapped in aluminum foil
and in it I put everything of value that I had in the house,
so all the money, my check book,
things that I really felt were valuable to me,
I placed in that and surrounded them,
surrounded this bowl with the elements
in a specific pattern, water, the air, fire, the earth
and I never had a sense of being
stressed around money again.
And my life changed dramatically.
In fact, I went from counting pennies to food
to a lifestyle that most people are pretty envious of.
So, I really believe that that's, I'm not unusual.
I believe that what happened to me
I could show other people how to do.
My book, or our book, Alters of Power and Grace
is an outcropping of many years of research in the field
of finding how to create powerful, small environments
that will transform people's lives.
Let me ask you about that.
Say you go into an environment
and the house itself, maybe on a Vastu level,
isn't that well-laid-out, energy's blocked all over
the place, and no Prahna or Chi really happening there.
Can you take a small space within that house,
create the alter, and still have the effects,
even though the larger environment
might not be supporting that energy?
Alters would be definitely a tool that would help
balance the five elements in that environment,
and reduce the stress, creating a
sacred space within the environment.
Vastu is so vast, it talks about designing
the very, very smallest of tables and chairs and beds
up into designing an entire city.
Jaipur is a city that was designed based on Vastu.
So, an alter is also described in the Vedas,
in Vastu, as long as you can get all five elements
in their proper directions and proper proportions,
then you can create something that
definitely will have an influence on the environment.
I wanted to add something,
Mike recently was brought on board
for a new development that is being built
outside of Washington, DC, it's a entire city
and they redesigned the city once they brought Mike in,
according to Vastu.
Very interesting,
so people are beginning to take this very seriously,
because having seen results obviously,
or they wouldn't be taking it seriously.
So, as a moment ago, you were talking about
the large, if Vastu's very extensive, it can go
from the micro to the macro.
How, talk about, a little bit, if you would please,
the intention that goes into it
and your personal, emotional interaction with it,
and what that does to it.
And how necessary that is or isn't.
It is a science, so the intention is
is not the foremost thing, although the intention
definitely aids in anything you do, obviously.
But what, basically what we're doing is,
there's two forces of nature.
The magnetic energy that comes from the north
and solar energy that comes from the east.
And they form an electromagnetic grid system
that covers the Earth.
You could think of them as
longitudinal and latitudinal lines.
And these, this grid system radiates energy
that comes from the center of the Earth
and it also acts as a receptor
for solar, lunar and stellar energies.
The Earth is pulsating with life
and radiating this life out through the grid system.
And if we can align our bodies
and our buildings with that grid system,
then it's like swimming with the flow of a river,
instead of against the current of a river,
and you gain that supportive nature.
That's exactly what Vastu does in very simple terms.
So, with creating a sacred space in your home,
such as one of these alters, you're creating
that kind of energy vortex as it will,
something you can swim with.
It's just basically aligning yourself with nature,
or the divine.
And when you partner with the divine, with nature,
things just move so much easier
and there's so much less stress.
So, give us some examples
with some other people besides yourself,
that have had just these miraculous
changes of fortune and events in their lives
as a result of setting up one
of these powerful, little alters.
Everybody loves these stories.
Well, before we start, I just wanted to make
a clarification about the alters
as opposed to the entire environment.
Yes?
When Mike was talking about that the science
and the need for intention in that,
I think that he was looking at the entire environment.
Part of the power of the alters,
has to do with your desire for support from the divine.
So there has to be a relationship there.
And the alters actually, once ignited
by a sacred ceremony that you can perform,
there's several that I talk about in the book,
the alter becomes alive, it becomes
like a homing device for your highest intention.
So there is a certain amount of intentionality
that goes into the alter.
So I really did wanna clarify that piece.
And it seems that this intentionality
is something that's been lost in western life.
We're pretty busy, we're sort of blowing past
all the things that, historically,
have been considered sacred and worthy of reflection.
We don't seem to reflect much,
so might this also not be a reminder
to be in gratitude, to ask for what we want
in a, of the divine, in a more thoughtful, reflective way?
But also to step out of the way,
and have the humility to know that we're not the doers.
And I think that--
That's big.
That's big in western culture.
A difficult thing.
It's a very difficult thing, but in truth,
much of what we think we want comes of from our small mind.
It's not from what would be our highest option.
So let's talk about a couple
of clients you can think of, right off hand,
that had incredible experiences of stepping
out of their way after they built their alter.
Well, one of them was my daughter.
I'll just give it a home example.
She was, she had decided to go to law school
but was very young and looking at going to law school at 20.
And felt like she was needing some support
and didn't really know where to turn.
So we built an alter, specifically for
helpful people to come into her life.
And it seemed by accident, that at a lunch,
Mike met a woman who happened to be a graduate
of the law school that she had decided to go to
and was very connected with that law school still,
and introduced her to the dean and all the professors
and kind of got her a mentor right on campus
to help her so that she would be able
to have support selecting the appropriate
teachers and classes that she needed,
and to also find her a job right there on campus.
So, the law school angel showed up.
It was a perfect situation for her.
But also, many people, I get phone calls and emails
all the time from people who have
experienced the feeling of being
in power for the first time in their lives.
Can you give us just one more,
one or two more juicy examples
of someone who really felt kind of down and out
and just starting turning things around?
I love these stories.
Well, one that I, that always comes to mind is the first
alter that I ever did as part of my graduate work
with some friends up the street from where we lived
and we built an abundance alter in their bedroom
and I said to them, "Just call me next weekend,
"let me know how it's going."
And the next day they called and, out of nowhere,
people that they had sold a piece of property to
that had, that was on the floodplains in an area
that flooded a lot, the time they sold the property,
they told the new buyers that if you have anybody
that ever wants to buy this piece of property,
we'd like to get a cut, a percentage,
because we're giving this, basically, to you.
And 15 years later, they had called the very next day,
after the alter was built, that said they had a check
for fifteen thousand dollars and it went on every day.
For the next two months, they were calling me,
telling me these phenomenal events had happened
and by the time two months was done,
they were flying to LA to buy a house.
One became a screen-writer, the other became
an executive in Joel's Clearwater project.
This is about, this is in the category
of the small, not-so-small miracles.
Not-so-small miracles, but you know,
we, we, when we go in and do people's homes and offices
we usually do build an alter for something
that they really are working on.
And the alters that we talk about are directionally placed,
so there are eight different aspirations
that people are usually drawn to,
like good health, or better relationships,
or their job and career desires,
or abundance and you know, those are areas
that most people have issues with.
So we always build an alter to support that desire
and change occurs.
It's not an unusual thing.
Can we talk about a few specifics
while we look at some images now,
for example, what would be some of the traits
of an alter for prosperity?
Well, the color for prosperity is green
and a secondary color is gold.
So those colors should be represented on an alter.
So you would have a water element in the northeast.
It could be a fountain or a clear and translucent vase
with fresh, pure water in it.
You could put something living, like a beautiful flower,
we never use dried flowers on an alter, anything dried.
We want the alter to be as alive as your dreams.
In the southeast would be a candle,
preferably a green or gold color.
In the northeast, we have the water,
in the northwest, we have the air element.
It could be a standing wind chime, feathers,
incense in the southwest is the Earth element.
It could be rocks, it could be crystals,
anything from nature.
And in the center is an offering bowl or a plate,
something where you would place a distillation
of your highest desire, just in a word or two.
Something that would evoke a feeling.
And in back of all of that, would be
what we call a personal symbol.
It could be anything that represents to you
that personal desire.
One abundance alter we created,
Mike made a great little collage of dollar bills--
Oh, this is in your book.
That's perfect.
And we've made all kinds of different things,
maybe for a health alter, we put all members of the family,
or if it was a relationship alter, and there wasn't
a specific person in your life, maybe pictures
of people that looked happily involved.
Or a lot of women I know, we just
tell them to go through magazines
and pick out faces of people that touch their hearts.
Anything that evokes a deeper emotion,
so that when you look at the alter,
you are touched by its beauty.
The pieces on the alter should touch your heart,
because it is that, the essence of love,
that feeds your alter and as you admire and love it
it gains energy from that.
And doesn't that essence, or feeling of love,
also generally evoke a sense of humility.
Just intrinsically.
Yes.
Well, one great teacher we know
says that love isn't an emotion
it is our very nature.
So, it is everything that permeates
that which is seen and unseen.
And your book, which was published
oh, when was it published?
It just came out in October.
Just a few, yeah, just a few months ago.
And already, it's receiving acclaim.
It's received, if you wouldn't mind bragging,
just a little bit, tell us about some of the awards
that this book is winning and I can see why,
it's laid out very nicely, very user-friendly, beautiful.
It won Spirituality Book of the Year
from USA Booknews,
and it's a finalist for the Benjamin Franklyn Award
for New Age Book of the Year, as well as
Forward Magazine, Body Mind Spirit
and their Self-Help categories,
and the Nautilus Award for Small Press.
Wow, your first book.
First book.
Self-published,
which I heard you speak the other night
and I love that part of the story,
because I think that's, as an author as well,
an important part of the story,
which is you can wait and wait,
you can throw it out there, you can seem to have
fabulous alliances with big New York publishers,
but in the end, you said, "No, I wanna do it my way."
And you did, and look at that rewards that are coming.
I'm very, I'm very impressed that you had the guts
to walk away from a New York deal
and do it yourself, the right way,
rather than having it compromised.
Well, I guess it's at a certain point,
it's your vision, it's your dream, it's your baby.
You want it to reflect your love
and I couldn't imagine this book anything but beautiful.
How many alters did you set in place
for this book, the creation of this book?
There's close to 100 or over 100 colored photos--
No, I mean you personally,
to bring this book into fruition.
Oh!
You must have set up
a number of alters on this one.
Yeah, yup, yes, we had a, in my office,
there was definitely, we had a living alter.
It was the, an alter that continued to evolve
as we went through many stages of the book.
So, the final thing was, on that alter,
was everything to celebrate the fact
that the book was absolutely birthed in a beautiful way
and when it came back from the printer
I had it in hand for Book Expo America
last year in Chicago and that was my goal.
And I was so very proud to actually be able
to show people how beautiful it really looked.
It is a beautiful book
and though the ink has barely dried on its pages
it's so new, you're already into your next one.
Yes.
We've actually, we're in our second printing
and also, we'll have our second book in hand
in just a few months--
That's the nice thing about self-publishing.
Right.
Very good, well, congratulations
on all your awards and also thank you
for producing such a lovely work of art
in and of itself.
Thank you.
I want to share something with you.
Robin and Michael came to our home
and did a Vastu consultation after we met with them
because we were so impressed with them.
Well, the next day an unexpected gift
of $4,500 arrived in the mail.
We were literally blown away.
I just had to share that little bit with you.
Meanwhile, Robin's book, Alters of Power and Grace
is a work of art and her new book will be out shortly.
To learn more about Vastu, click on the link
next to their website.
Until next time, thanks for watchin.
(gentle music)